#SENG 310 - Lecture 8

###25 January 2015


##Design Thinking

“Design thinking is a human-centered approach to innovation that draws from the designer's toolkit to integrate the needs of people, the possibilities of technology, and the requirements for business success.”  – Tim Brown (President and CEO of IDEO)

###Design Thinking vs. User-Centered Design

* __Empathy__ is a primary lens
* Walking in "the user's shoes"
* Tends to involve __multidisciplinary teams__
* Less technology driven, more __user driven__
* Increased focus creating working __prototypes__
* __Failure__ of design is more openly accepted

###Design Thinking Toolbox

Instead of making something nicer or better, think: __what should we be making?__

__Sketching__  
Fast, freeform exploration of many ideas Critical for innovation and conversations

__Brainstorming__  
Ideas come from all members of group, explore otherwise unlikely solutions, approaches, or perspectives.

__Designing with others__  
Paper and pencil  Wireframes  Come up with multiple designs

__Prototyping as a form of play__ 
 
* Don’t just aim for good (it may be limiting) 
* Study, study, study* Imitate (connect old ideas in new ways) 
* Slow down* Allow events to change you

__Have an iterative process__  

* Emphasize
* Synthesize
* Ideate / Brainstorm
* Prototype / Evaluate

###How to Begin

Don't wait to be an expert, the process can enable experimatation. Sooner ideas are 'out there', the sooner feedback arives.

__Use Minimal Viable Product:__

* Helps to validate ideas with least amount of effort
* Series of experiments that will help you learn
* "Fail early, fail often"
* Help you find out
	* Who may use it?
	* What kind of language do they use?
	* Will they pay for it?

###What to Design

__Be Creative"__

* Period of "not knowning" leads to great possibilities
* Set time aside to drift
* "Harest ideas. Edit applications"

__Always ask why:__

* Anti-experts see possibilities others may miss.
* Ask the 'stupid' questions

__Embrace Contraints:__

* Limitations may lead you to creative solutions
* Simple designs lead to emergent behaviours
* Keep it small and simple

###Balancing Utility and Delight

Levels of Design Appeal:

1. Visceral (I want it)
2. Behavioural (I can master it)
3. Reflective (it completes me)

####Prioritizing features

Rather than crossing out features, __circle__ the ones you really want

* Think in terms of users' goals, not features
* Where can you have the most impact?
* What is the core value?
* What is essential? What is needed everyday?

Displace features to: what, phone, or computer

###Misc:

####d.school Mindset: 

* Show, Don’t tell* Focus on Human Values 
* Craft Clarity* Embrace Experimentation 
* Be Mindful of Process 
* Bias toward Action 
* Radical Collaboration

##Assignments

None
